---
layout: post
title: "Difficult Decisions in Leading SDS"
description: Reflections on leading the NUS Statistics and Data Science Society in AY2021/22.
date: 2025-05-01
tags: life
giscus_comments: true
---

## Difficult Decisions

As the president of the 43-member student organisation, I have deliberated over decisions that I found hard to make, with a multitude of factors to consider and a variety of methods to arrive at the decision that I eventually commit to. This post is a reflection and introspection into those decisions made at the time.

NUS SDS is the NUS Statistics and Data Science Society, a 43-member student organisation whose activities span across organising technical workshops, career talks, data science competitions and a range of internal initiatives led by members. 

NUS SDS has lots to celebrate about - those belong to the social channels - but this post focuses only on difficult decisions that I had to make as president, to serve as discussion material for anyone interested. I have removed sensitive information where necessary, except those needed to illustrate degrees.

## MSOC - To help or not, and how to help?

MSOC is the Math and Stats Orientation Camp, a co-organised event between the NUS Math Society and NUS SDS to orient freshmen before their university term begins. MSOC begins its planning a year before the actual event. 

- Context - Not my term, independent team
- Matter - Corporate sponsorship agreements not fulfilled
- Difficulty - Not involved in the development, tense emotions, money involved
- Thought process - Resolve emotions before reasoning, be clear about potential consequences
- Conclusion - Matter resolved, emotions quelled, learning points, personal message
- Afterthought - Glad I decided to step in

## Friend - To argue or not?

- Context - Friend of a few years
- Matter - Too much commitment, unjustified impoliteness
- Difficulty - Emotions involved, responsibility and power, friend
- Thought process - Disengage and calm down, delay response
- Conclusion - Excessive attention from his perspective, family difficulties
- Afterthought - Very luckily delayed response, could have damaged a friendship

## DAC - To disqualify or not?

- Context - Undergraduate competition, encourage spirit of data literacy
- Matter - A team signed up with a postgraduate student
- Difficulty - Best submission in my view, and to disqualify goes against spirit of encouraging data literacy
- Methodology - Discussion among DAC team, rely on principles
- Conclusion - Disqualified, unhappiness, regret
- Afterthought - To minimise issues, imagine the perspective of all stakeholders in prior planning